Hey everyone, welcome back.
So you might be wondering to yourself, "What is the difference between product and project management?"
Believe it or not, there are a lot of people out there that think these things are one and the same.
In fact, they are not. The roles, that is the job titles of product manager and project manager are very, very different.
However, Project Management as a skill is definitely something you will still need as a product manager.
So let's dive right in and talk about the differences between these two.
We already know that product managers are responsible for the success of a product, but are they accountable
and what does success mean?
Well, success is defined by KPIs or metrics. A product manager is responsible for being successful
by reaching certain metrics.
And don't worry too much about that right now,
we're going have a whole section on metrics later.
So anyways, PMs have a metrics goal
that means success, and they need to reach that goal, and the method by which they reach that goal is not defined.
It is totally up to them and their team to decide how they want to achieve that goal.
I'll give you an example here.
Let's say I run an e-commerce company and I hire you as a product manager.
I tell you that I want to increase check out conversion percent by 10 percent this quarter.
You can go off and do user research,
look at all the data, any number of other things that you might want to do to decide how you're
going to approach solving that problem or reaching that goal.
OK, so you might decide to redesign the checkout process because users don't understand it.
Or maybe you decide to put in faster servers because the site is a little bit slow and you find out that
it being so slow drops the conversion percentage, because so many people leave before they check
out. No matter which of these approaches you pick,
you succeed because you get that 10 percent.
However, as you probably already know, one of these approaches is going to be better than the other.
That all depends on the upfront research and user testing that you do with you and your designer and the rest of your team.
OK. So how about a project manager?
Well, a project manager is different because they are simply responsible for accomplishing a project,
not a goal, and a project usually has a timeline and a budget as a constraint.
Project managers are extremely important for rigid things,
like, let's say, building a skyscraper.
If I'm the CEO of a construction company and I hired a project manager to build a skyscraper, I would
want to hire a very good project manager to get the job done on time, on budget, and I want to know that
that person knows how to best react to things like weather delays, or supply shortages, or that sort of thing.
What I would not want in this instance is someone that's acting like a product manager and saying that
"I want to build a building that's, you know, 100 stories tall, and holds 10,000 people," and the product
manager can kind of do it however they feel like they're going to accomplish that goal because, again,
product managers and their teams are doing a lot of experimenting to see what will work best,
and you definitely don't want to be experimenting
when you're building a skyscraper.
You want to know for sure that
the way you plan to do it is going to work.
Now, like I said before, as a product manager you definitely need to know the skill of project management,
because on the front end you are collecting requirements and ideas and defining potential future initiatives
and then you're actually putting those things into development, you're putting them into,
you go into execution mode with your team.
At that point,
you do need to know how to project manage things,
at least in a software sense.
Don't worry though, later in the course we talk about project management and we have several lectures
that go through the various components of project management as a product manager working in a software world.
Now, once again, what I want to say is that project managers aren't totally useless in software, and in fact
there's a lot of things that they're useful for outside of building skyscrapers, and bridges, and that sort of thing.
Can you think of any types of software engineering projects where project managers are completely necessary?
How about when two tech companies combine together and they want to merge their technology platforms?
That's already kind of known, how this is going to work, how they're going to merge together,
otherwise the companies probably
wouldn't have merged in the first place.
But there's so many moving pieces here that someone needs to be checking in constantly and making sure
that things are happening on time.
There's another example where project management is a little more prominent and maybe useful than product management.
Take, for instance, an agency, like a software consulting agency, or an ad agency, or something.
Clients will come up to them and say, "We want you to make a campaign" or "We want you to make a particular
piece of software" and kind of everything is defined
on what needs to be built.
So then it becomes, again, that execution mode where the project manager really just needs to make sure
everything is executed on budget, on time, and there's not a lot of experimenting to try to do things
differently or reach a particular goal.
Okay.
So that wasn't so hard, was it? There's a really big difference between product management and project
management, and we know that there is some project management inside the role of product management.
But as far as careers go and having those titles as a profession, they are two completely separate things.
Brief recap. Product managers are responsible for accomplishing a goal by any means they feel will be best.
After they consult and collaborate with their team, and do user research, and all sorts of stuff like
that, and project managers are responsible for accomplishing a set of things which is usually do these
requirements on this project either in a physical world, like a bridge, or a building, or on big pieces
of software, and then do it within this time frame and on this budget.
Okay, so I will see you guys in the next lecture.